and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth
show excited to be joined by fred cope
stake today
fred is the founder of bryndis a sales
training consultancy
over the last 22 years he's traveled
around the world 14 times visiting 36
countries
and working with 10 000 sales people and
over 200 companies
he has taken some of the things that
really make a difference in modern
selling and put these in his book
selling through partnership partnering
skills fred
welcome sir how are you doing brilliant
no thank you thank you so appreciate it
cool man so looking forward to chatting
today fred um should be quite a
interesting controversial topic i reckon
so um
we're gonna be chatting all through why
your sales process is outdated
and how we can fix it and i know um
speaking personally
i've um when i first got into the world
of sales i never really had a process
so like like many i'm sure i was just
kind of winging it seeing what
opportunities came my way doing a bit of
cold calling doing a bit of digital
work trying to generate leads here and
there where i could and just kind of
going with the conversation letting the
customer drive
the chats not really knowing where i
wanted to go with it
thinking that every opportunity was a
deal that i could land and not really
having a process to follow to be able
to qualify properly to be able to put
people for a process
to know when an opportunity was good or
bad so i think this could be really
useful for
everyone tuning in that's perhaps not
got the best process now or wants to
fine-tune it
and i'm sure i'll learn plenty as well
fred so first and foremost
why are many of us still behind the
times when it comes to sales which we
know
is the lifeblood of growing a business
um
well sales is evolving i mean this the
same as anything evolved sales does
and so there's a number of iterations
that sale has gone through
and what happens is a lot of people have
tended to get stuck
in something that maybe their first
training was or a way that
did work for them or something like that
and they just not kept up with the times
basically it's a simple answer sure
so people just kind of stuck with some
training perhaps they had when they
first started their job
um and we all know i've been there i've
had jobs in the past where it's just
kind of they stick you in your chair
stick you in front of your computer or
maybe you don't have one in your laptop
and then um
just just get stuck in start dialing
start phoning a data list and all that
good stuff
so um perhaps we could talk about
a more of a modern approach what is a
modern approach that we
should be adapting or that you recommend
anyway fred
yeah well i mean if i let me take you
back a little bit so if we talk through
how sales has evolved and then sort of
where i think we are
bang on up to date now um you know maybe
you or
the viewers the listeners will be able
to see whereabouts they are
and perhaps where they can make some
some adjustments and so
if you so go back to the 50s sales was
very process focused
you know because it's all about having
the right steps and knowing what you
could do time and time again
to be successful and that's great i mean
there's nothing wrong with that
why would you not want to do that the
60s came along and if you imagine what
that decade was like it was all about
psychology and so this is understanding
for the buyer how they thought
adapting personality personality style
selling and again you say
actually that's pretty good we want some
of that don't we 70s
feature advantage benefit you know
what's in it for me and again you'd say
yes we want some of this stuff
80s close close close objection handling
and
probably the least useful decade but
still parts we want
90s consultative selling absolutely now
this was a sea change in sales
where people really learned how to
question better and understand
customers need but that's still 30 odd
years old so
if we look to what happened in the
naughties it was very much more about
understanding value
so it's understanding the problem
understand the pain but also can i do
something
to add value to that move into the tens
and this is almost about well yeah i get
that you and your company can help me
but what about you you know are you as
the salesperson demonstrating that
you can tap into all this resource that
you can understand what value is
you can make it work for me and so then
when we move into the
the 20s so where we are now it's it's
more collaborative than it's ever been
it was it was taking this direction
anyway and then
you know we're hit with pandemic we
covered with people really having to
work out different ways of operating
it's all about becoming more
collaborative about co-creating about
working together becoming more
customer-centric
that's where the smart money's at that's
where the shifts are
and people are probably stuck at some
stage along that journey i'd say
yeah so diving in deeper on the
collaborative side of things fred what
does that really mean because i know in
my mind
is is that talking about asking good
questions to your customers so really
insightful questions to show that you've
done your research before you're
carrying out calls
um and asking what they think when
you're presenting solutions in front of
them
and bringing new ideas to the table or
is there a lot more
to it or perhaps you can give us some
examples well that's a really good solid
basis sam if you're doing that you are
well on the way to becoming a
collaborative a very
useful person for a customer to want to
work with
so i think really part of the sales now
it's what i say is don't throw the baby
out of the bath water there's a lot of
good stuff that
we've seen in those evolution of sales
we don't want to throw them away
but we just want to apply them in that
way where absolutely
insight is an important thing so
valuable information
and using information to help people
think to help people think about well
this is where we could really do stuff
and do stuff together
if we can help people with that and then
add our resource in
um and and really start to co-create and
make those plans happen
that's where we really start to see
collaboration become where sales people
need to be thinking
um okay and is i guess there could be
two
two sides of the coin on this side is
also about knowing when
it's perhaps not not the best time to
collaborate with a prospect or a
potential customer or client
um and then working out kind of good
times to to ask decent questions
insightful questions like we mentioned
then and when when we can have some
collaboration
also knowing when it might not make
sense to to do some business together is
that is that part of it are we off the
market
no always part of it i mean if you're if
you're let me
check my understanding if you're talking
about qualifying out and saying you know
what this isn't a real opportunity
i don't think we can do anything here we
can't really help them
they don't really want help maybe the
time isn't right i am better using
my most valuable resource which is my
time in
going somewhere else and sort of having
a a better return on that
than really sort of trying to fight
something that isn't going to happen
i i guess that's always been the case in
sales that's you know call it
qualification call it validation
call it whatever you want it's be good
at it and
really pick where you're going to
dedicate your time and effort
sure um and is it all about
collaboration thread or should we still
be trying to guide conversations and
lead conversations
or should we ask be asking for our
potential clients feedback throughout
calls for our zoom calls whatever
method we're using to communicate
perhaps face to face if we're in other
parts of the world not the uk
um should we always be looking for kind
of that back and forth during the
conversation or should we make sure that
we're also there
as an established leader so it looks
like we don't know what we're talking
about so we're trying to guide the
journey because
the point i'm trying to get to is
there's many different
sales processes that some of our
listeners might know so whether that's
the challenge or sale whether that's
sandler selling there's there's
tons and tons of process so is there a
certain one we should follow
where we should be leading conversations
that front or should we
how should we know which one's best or
all of the above
and that's the skill of the modern sales
person it's to know
when to just shut up and let the person
speak because
you want to hear what they've got to say
but you can ask the best question in the
world if somebody really doesn't know
the answer
and they sort of need that seeding they
need a bit of a bit of
a bit of a push if you like that would
make sense to do that then
it could be that we go to full
presentation mode say look here is some
information this is stuff that you need
to then inform the next part of the
discussion that we're going to have
so it's it's not as simple as kind of
get an appointment
discovery present close maybe a
negotiation
i don't think it's as simple as that now
a good salesperson really understands
what they need to be doing to get to the
point of the the outcomes where all
parties are satisfied
we are creating value and we're doing
we're doing something well together
so it will take different shapes and
forms at different parts the process
different people um because we know
decision making units are getting bigger
and bigger and bigger and so there's
more people
involved it it's not as
that's why process for me just going
that that
there it doesn't really cut it anymore
it's more kind of having a framework and
adapting what you're doing
to be doing the right thing at the time
um
interesting that i guess yeah yeah
that's it i mean you're you're exactly
right i mean typically when when i'm
having conversations with with clients
web choice about digital marketing
perhaps we might just like say we might
generate an appointment a lead might
come in through our website or through
linkedin whatever channel is
we might set an initial call which might
be a discovery call depending on the
size of the project we might then agree
to do a presentation
and then we might look to move forward
with the deal or if it's perhaps a
slightly bigger deal or there's other
decision makers in we might have another
call to involve everyone else
um but are you saying that you shouldn't
necessarily stick to a linear
xyz these are the steps depending on how
the conversation flows
you need to adapt you might need to
customize that that process
um i think it's useful to have an idea
of what the linear process might look
like
and in a in a less complex sale it
it's probably easier to stick to that
and it does give you some direction
as the sale gets more complex as the
sales gets more valuable
it has more moving parts to it i think
we need to be more flexible within that
to make sure we're doing the right thing
at the right time
and this could be that to one person you
are presenting you know they don't know
something you've got to give them
information
someone else you're very much asking
questions somebody else you're sitting
down together you're trying to make two
and two equal five
um so it's it's being very adaptable
it's being very
flexible to again as i say
to drive the outcomes to get to the
point that we want which is
all parties happy with what we've what
we've done together cool and i don't
want to go off on too much of a tangent
but this is something that just came
into my mind when you mentioned that
when we're doing discovery calls with
our clients or initial calls or
assessments whatever you want to call
them
when we're having our first conversation
with a prospective customer how do we
know
when not to give away too much
information so that we become a free
consultant
and they're just literally tearing our
brains for all the ideas and then can do
the job themselves
or how to balance that with sounding
like a professional
asking the right questions but not
giving all of our ideas away so they can
go off hire someone else or even worse
do it themselves or get a cousin to do
it
see i probably wouldn't worry about it
from that point of view
if you're giving that information that
much information that early
you're probably talking too much anyway
not because you're giving me all the
good stuff
you can give me all your best stuff but
i probably don't even recognize that
that's what it is and i won't be able to
do anything with it anyway
you're just giving information whereas
what am i most interested in i'm
interested in myself and the day
you know everyone's interested in
herself more than anything else so it's
i'd be wanting i'd be probably picking
up on somebody you are talking too much
and not letting
them talk rather than you you could give
away the family silver
that's that's why i think that would be
the the worst thing to do but for a
slightly different a different reason
sure so it's more about gauging the
conversation and make sure you're you're
actually listening properly
asking decent questions and and remember
the questions aren't for you
i suspect you can go and talk to a
client and you can you could look at the
website you could look at what they do
you can look at the social media
activity and think right i know what
this guy's got to do i could just go in
and tell them
and if you come and tell me if you like
and i just go
yeah i don't understand what you're
saying i don't get it i don't even know
why you're telling me this i'm not
interested
boring when you ask me questions that i
start to realize that you know what
maybe the website isn't performing as
well as it could do and
maybe i'm not having as many
conversations as i should be in social
media
that starts to get me thinking that
starts to open my mind
to wanting to know what solution is and
guess what fred
i can tell you how to deal with that
that that would be the more you
smart way to operate i'd suggest yeah no
that makes sense
i guess we've all been guilty of um
assuming we know
like let's say an inquiry comes in
doesn't matter which channel whether
it's for your website through linkedin
for email whatever
and we we see the brief we see they've
given us a few ideas and
i've been guilty of before kind of
thinking i know the solution
and then perhaps offering it to them and
they don't take it the reason being when
you like you say when you start asking
them questions until they say it
themselves
until they literally agree that this is
the issue this is the problem we're
having this is why it's causing effect
on our business
um and this is why it's affecting me
personally until you've uncovered that
and they've actually said themselves you
can't present a solution because they
haven't agreed that they actually have
that issue or they want to want to fix
something right
yeah correct they've just not really
understood it they're sort of inquired
because they
know kind of that something's not right
and they need that help through the
discovery and understanding
now there's another intro i mean the
sales is just getting more complex
because there's another interesting
thing going on
in the sort of more complex sales where
there's more people involved and you
might have
more professional buyers they are far
further down their decision-making
process
down their buying process than they've
ever been
and so there's a danger if we're not
careful of really understanding
where they are in that that we come in
and we're being all helpful and
they're just like you're telling us
stuff we already know this just isn't
valuable
we've got all this we've taken all the
information it's available out there
we've synthesized it we've got very
specific stuff we're trying to do here
and you're just not doing yourself a
favor so
we've also got to be aware for that from
the kind of other end of the spectrum so
yeah www don't you're giving not enough
you're giving too much you're not doing
it quite right
we've got to gauge what that is and if
you look at
going back to your very first question
look at a lot of the sales processes
it's about selling that you do to
someone
whereas what we're saying more and more
now is that selling is that you do
with someone and so the focus on the the
customer the buyer
what they're doing how they're doing it
and even helping them to understand
because
they might not even realize that's where
quite a lot of value sits
makes sense and on that note fred what
can we do
to actually make sure what are some tips
that you can offer us to make sure we
are becoming more collaborative we are
being more
helpful to our customers and we're
utilizing partnering partnering skills
which you talk about in your book your
podcast
and so we can actually put some of those
things into play
yeah so i mean you use the word earlier
curious be curious and that's always
great advice to give to any salesperson
ask questions will always be good solid
advice and so a lot of the things that i
explained in in sort of the evolutions
of sales
are still absolutely solid where i'm
coming at it with
partnering skills in particular is that
pq is sort of like the lesser-known
cousin if you like of iq and eq
and it's it's a bunch of skills that
have been identified as
people who are good at partnering are
strong in it so now we don't have to be
building full-on partnerships that's
that's not what it's about but if the
mindset is that
actually as a customer it's kind of as
though we're in partnership with them
even if they're like the the the deal
the agreement doesn't say so
if you can weave this these partnering
skills into your approach into the way
you operate
that is going to make you a better
salesperson that's why i covered it sort
of so
so strongly and that's why i put it into
book because
the mindset benefits as do the behaviors
as do the things that
are going to make a difference in this
modern selling environment
got it got it and aside from we've
talked about asking great questions we
talked about listening properly apart
from doing those things
is there any other way we can build
trust as
an advisor as a salesforce business
professional
to to really not just come across like
uh someone trying to sell our wares
but really like we are an established
partner we really know what we're
talking about
and we are someone that this this
customer wants to work with not just for
now
for a one-off deal but for for the long
term for for this foreseeable future
yeah and so trust is it's it's one of
the elements of partnering skills when
i'm going through the six which are
trust win-win focus interdependence
self-disclosure and feedback comfort
with change
and future orientation i do usually
begin with trust because it is key to
all those relationships
and one of the things we building trust
is this fantastic thing called the trust
equation
put together by a guy called david
meister from
harvard is harvard university professor
and it looks at the credibility that
you've got it looks the reliability that
you have it looks at the intimacy you
have with the customer
but because it's an equation these
things are all divided by
your self-orientation so if you imagine
equation the higher your
self-orientation the more you're doing
all of that good stuff
but with your own kind of benefit in
mind
the less trust you will build so the
real key the tip the bit you're looking
for is that you've got to do these
things that
again we could all imagine are going to
be good to build trust but you really
have to do it with the other party's
interest at heart
if you're ultimately doing it because
you want to get something out of it it
shows
it won't be you know we hear a lot about
authentic genuine whatever
yeah you've got to have the other
party's interest at heart if you do
well then actually yeah good things will
happen and you know what goes wrong
comes around
so that's the big tip on there it's
trying to lose that self-centeredness
and that feeds straight to win-win you
know mutually beneficial outcomes
and yeah all the elements work work
really well together
that's why pq works i love that um
and i think a lot of sales people that
i've seen on linkedin
have been talking about detaching
yourself from the outcome
so i'm not sure if that's exactly on the
same line
but i guess to a certain extent because
you're gearing everything you say
more towards their interests not towards
i need to hit this sales target i need
to get this deal over the line because
it's nearly the end of the month
i need to pay the bills or whatever
you've got on your mind because you want
to get this customer over the line or
this deal over the line
you really need to think look can we
generally help them i'm gonna i'm gonna
be curious i'm actually gonna ask
questions that are relevant to what
they're talking about
i'm not just gonna shift the
conversation towards can we work with
you can we get it still done can we go
for you a discount to get the business
yes skip down the pq elements to future
orientation
which doesn't say yeah you gotta get a
deal don't because your quarter finishes
on this date
you know it's really about yeah look we
are we should be in this for the long
term and actually if i don't hit it
quite now
what goes again longer term it's going
to be better
you know oh i could sign them up and i
had a conversation with a sales
enablement director the other day
where yeah we could sign people up for a
one-year deal happy days yeah smaller
budget they can get
in under their spending cap bank sorted
actually that's probably not good for
yourself or the customer long term
because they're gonna have to do another
deal which they spend more money on um
well you've now got to do the wholesale
again rather than if you'd sold it for
three years
so it's easy to say when you've not got
the sales target hanging over you but
that kind of that longer term focus
does make sense you know future
orientation and thinking about
where is this ultimately going um
so yeah i mean to detach yourself from
the outcome
i've i've always struggled with that a
little bit because i i think
i think it's meant people sort of just
throw it out left right center
problem detect yourself from the outcome
that you touch yourself for the outcome
that type of you know they'll add value
they seem to be very common phrases on
linkedin
i think the origin and again you know
i'm
i'll be very happy if anybody listening
to this can sort of
set me straight on it i think it's more
about when you're prospecting when
you're cold calling
and you're likely to get reset rejection
and so actually
don't let that really grind you down i
think that's where it is
i hope it is because if you're saying
that actually the outcomes of
what you're doing in the overall sale
don't matter that is way off the mark
so first one not a problem second one
serious issue with it
so someone who says someone will say you
know chatbots
yeah i think there's more mistake i
think um early sales
sell cycles like early in the sales
process whether it's like you say cold
outreach
or whether it's initial discovery calls
i think that's the the part that
i was um referring to there whereas
obviously like you said when you're
deeper into it
when you're looking to get the deal done
really understanding your customers
that's how i've
done this i think we're on the same page
with that yeah it's like yeah i'm
working with you we've got right
this project if it don't work i don't
care i'll detach from that
yeah good luck to you exactly i don't
think you'll be in business too long
um but i guess if if you are genuinely
interested generally actually wanting to
help the customer it doesn't just help
you to like say get the deal over then
but it helps you long term so i suppose
like we said establishes trust it builds
up that relationship
and they know you're actually on your
side so if they want help with future
projects
future products that you can upsell them
future bits and pieces that you perhaps
do business on
they think yeah they that person fred
generally helped me at the start of the
conversation so i'm probably gonna go
back to him probably gonna work with him
for a long time we've got a few other
projects so it just gives you that extra
extra layer really of um trust and
reputation
yeah and you know what sometimes it's
even counterintuitive in the
it could be that yes there's a project
yes you need to do that i'm not sure
where the right to do this
with the right people to do this and to
say to say that
to say look but here's someone that you
might want to speak to that would be the
best way for you to achieve this
that's valuable in itself because you've
given advice and actually
that's a high degree of integrity isn't
it and and yeah that that stuff
it sticks the memory that people say oh
okay you can't help us with anything
ever again then it's actually
you were bang on honest you didn't do
business with me
for wanting to do the right thing you
become the go-to person
um so again easier to say another
target overview oh i'm gonna i'm gonna
drag that business in
but longer term focus it does better for
you
oh definitely it's like when i first
started digital
selling digital marketing solutions
people come to me perhaps asking for
on-site video production and all this
stuff and all we really
started out doing was web design web
development and search engine
optimization
and because it was an opportunity i
thought yeah we can do video we can
scrabble about we can get something
together i know jack the lady can do
this and then it ends up being hassle
you lose tons of money because you have
to find this freelancer that can do it
you have to account manage it you have
to organize it you have to make sure it
goes smoothly
and you soon realize that if you're
trying to do all these different trades
under one roof
whereas actually doing what you
specialize in it just causes a lot less
aggro you can deliver great
quality products to your customers and
you're not causing yourself pain
in the long run so then like you say
then bringing back to your point when
someone actually asks you for something
you don't do you can with integrity say
look
i'm afraid that's not something we do i
can point you in the direction of
someone i trust that they can probably
help you out and it
just again adds that's that trust that
we've been talking about yeah no
giggling because i'm also thinking
you've got all this you you've explained
that scenario so well after again your
stress levels are going through the roof
yeah that's it and at the end it's like
can i have a referral what
for real no transplant it's just not it
comes back to bite you doesn't it
certainly does definitely definitely had
it and
learned from that luckily um so on that
note fred what kind of mindsets and
behaviors
are going to be key to making sure our
sales process work
make sure we have sales success and both
both business growth success from from
your side of thinking
like say you know that that's why i go
so strong on these partnering skills
this pq
um it fits nicely with eq with iq
if that is your mindset that
i'm not going to partnership we're not
signing a business alliance agreement
here
but because they're going to be taking
products they're going to be taking
service because we're going to be doing
stuff together
it is a kind of partnership i think if
we
think like that that should then inform
the behaviors
that gets you doing the right things
like asking questions
genuinely because you want to understand
sometimes pushing a customer you
mentioned challenger you know and
sometimes that kind of way of working
you're doing it with the right intention
you're doing it because you're trying to
make a difference here
whatever piece of sort of selling best
practice you select
you're doing it with in the right way
because you're trying to do best for
yourself
and for the customer and for the way in
which you're working together
that's what good collaborators do we're
trying to make sense of something and
work well together on it
yeah i just want to test you on
something fred um i know we're coming up
for time
but i i love that what you just said
they're diving a bit deeper
poking a bit further because for example
often
um i don't know what kind of questions
you get come up when you're doing your
sales training or you're
talking to potential businesses thread
that might want to take on your sales
training but say for example
you're saying look what what do you want
to get out of this and they might say we
want to up our sales
do you just take that at face value
because i know when clients talk to me
they might say oh we want to get more
leads for our website
um obviously you need to dive a bit
deeper understand what that actually
means
so how how are some ways we can do that
without pissing people off too much that
we're just constantly asking why do you
want to do that what do you want to do
that for why do you want to do that
what's that mean what does this mean
go from w questions to ted's
that's my simple piece of advice that's
my advice on a tweet if you like
um so w questions you what why when
where who how
um now what you're saying is you need to
understand why
and five wise is a brilliant technique
you really get under the skin or
something
problem with why is a question is that
people can get a bit defensive
so even though they've come for your
help and i want to get more sales and
you say
why they're like well obvious because i
do
and and equally if you're challenging
something or someone why do you think
that's happening
well now you're making out that i've
done a load of mistakes and what i'm
doing isn't very good
and it doesn't always mean the
conversation goes so well
flip it into a ted which is actually
directive which is go
tell me more about that explain that
describe that again gets people to open
up in the same way as a question
but without god pissing them off and
getting them getting them wound up in
the way that you
said so yeah i want to get more i want
to get more sales
okay well yeah interesting that we all
but tell me more about what exactly you
mean
yeah describe when you say leads
what those look like yeah
explain your thinking behind why you're
asking me that
any of those ways of phrasing something
it's the same thing essentially but
it just comes across a lot better i
think yeah so just rather than asking
blunt questions asking
more more so why that's important to you
and why they want to get to that
objective
yeah so it sounds like you're trying to
help them i guess rather than just
questioning them
it is but it's just that's just the
easier way the easy way to remember
you've got w questions
what why when where who and how you've
got w at the end
um and then ted tell me explain describe
that that's the simple thing i think
i've
got written on two bits of paper that
i'm making a note of to go
stay in ted mode particularly when
you're probing particularly if you're
going deeper deeper deeper
that's good not heard that one before so
i like that awesome fred look really
appreciate you coming on i'm listening
to your next sorry tutorial i'm going to
listen to your next
your next set of interviews of whether
you're asking to tell explain and
describe
thank you you challenged me i'm going to
put it back a little i've made a note of
ted whether i
remember that it means that it's as long
as the acronym sticks in my head
hopefully it will
if not i think it's the swearing
character on the film
what was that about probably probably
fred thanks very much for coming on man
um do you like to ask most guests if you
could pick this
just one digital marketing channel to
grow a business from what would be your
channel of choicer
oh i would
i would have to say linkedin i think
would be the the sensible answer
um i'd love to say instagram because i'm
new on there
i haven't got many followers hint hint
um and
it's got lots of pretty pictures but
yeah the sensible answer for doing what
i'm doing the the
the world i'm involved in linkedin is is
where the action's at
it's the fans favorite when it comes to
b2b yeah
but insta's got better pickies on it oh
yeah there is that there is that nice um
nice little social distraction indeed
fred tell us a bit more about how evan
can learn from you a bit more about your
business
um how people can connect with you and
the best way to get in touch and perhaps
a bit about your book in your podcast
sure so i'll start at the end because
that was the easiest way to remember the
question so the book
is selling through partnering skills um
the podcast is called
exactly the same uh where it explores
the themes in it so understanding how to
use those elements of pq
uh in real life so i'll talk to sales
trainers i'll talk to
sales practitioners so sales directors
vp sales people are using this stuff
and there's lots and lots of really
interesting
ideas coming from that so it's not as
good as this
clearly i know but there's some good
there's a good discussion on there
um linkedin is a great place to get
get contact with me as you know you can
connect and message
and stuff on there so yeah that would be
the go-to place and
if you've got more questions we can we
can pick it up from from that that'll be
the easiest thing to say
nice one fred and thanks once again for
coming on the show appreciate it
now thank you for inviting me it's
always a pleasure cool man if you
enjoyed the show
be sure to search business growth show
on your podcast channel of choice be
apple podcast spotify youtube wherever
the heck you get your podcast
we interview two business leaders each
and every week to provide you actionable
tips
to grow your business your sales and
make best use of marketing
and thanks very much for tuning in